I was seeing six blue whales in
an area the size of a soccer
pitch
I've got to name the unorthodox
wheels because they actually
break the stereotypes we had for
these species it is set me on an
incredible adventure was back in
$MONTH 2003 i was working in a
whale research vessel that was
circumnavigating the globe on
this particular day of
significance i was standing up
on deck
straining my eyes looking out
for this part of sperms that we
trapped all night long I could
hear that sounds emanating from
the pilothouse below me but I
just couldn't see them
I knew what I was looking for
this shot lofty blue slide it
off to the left-hand side super
characteristic of sperm well I
searched and I looked for hours
and end and I couldn't find them
but then I saw this at all
powerful vertical blue that rose
all the way to the sky as far as
I could tell this animal is at
least two kilometers away from
us but it was an incredible
sight and I knew he could only
come from an animal it was
incredibly large and powerful so
I got super excited as you would
as well and I grabbed my
walkie-talkie to call down to my
captain I said Bob eleven
o'clock two kilometers gogo and
he says why and I said I think
it's a blue wheel and he said
sure gets off course that's
cruising the direction that I
have now sent him off in and i
am now like so afraid and
paranoid to lose this visual my
eyes are streaming as i stand to
the glare
I'm trying so hard to just focus
and that's when I think I
started to lose my mind because
it wasn't just one blue and I
was seeing I was seeing six blue
whales in an area the size of a
soccer pitch
I'm thinking to myself why on
earth with an animal the largest
that is ever on the plant with
the freedom to cut like travel
seventy percent of our planet
choose to just aggregating this
tiny little spot in a warm
tropical ocean so I was fresh
out of undergrad
and I started to think about
what I've been taught that may
take six and what my professors
had said and I remembered large
rails like blue whales and take
long-range migrations between
cold feeding areas and warm
breeding and carving areas that
was it I was super stoked I was
going to be the first person on
the planet to document blue
whales having six so I you know
I thought this is also my
career's made fame and fortune
but people complain about this
is so easy
gosh so I'm they're eating the
captain on him like Bob we have
to go this is going to be
incredible
so we're moving forward getting
their work moving as fast as
this but can take us and we get
there and is not what you think
it is
there's not a single whale penis
insight i am super disappointed
because these words are now
lolling at the surface hanging
out occasionally one will dive
come back up and I'm like what
the heck is going on my dreams
that I had created for the last
two kilometers of my life was
completely shattered
and I was like oh my god what am
I going to do with my life but I
insisted that we stay around and
watched for a little because you
know this is my first you will
or six and that's when I saw
this this ladies and gentlemen
is a pile of blue whale poop
what's most exciting about this
is not just the stunning red
color but the fact that there
was pool which meant these
animals were feeding somewhere
close
now remember what I told you the
start blue whales and take
long-range migrations between
cold feeding areas and warm
breeding and carving areas
bianca is five degrees above the
equator as warm as tropical as
it can get
what the hick how the hell were
they feeding in these waters
they considered unproductive
because they're warm
this was my Eureka moment
not everyone can say that their
career started with the pilot
but I'm pretty pleased to be
able to do that
the thing is this moment
spiraled into me pioneering blue
l research in the northern
Indian Ocean i launched the
first long-term study on this
population of pretty much
unknown blue wheels crazy but
true and it has set me on an
incredible adventure in the
intervening years i have
discovered that in fact these
waters because of the enclosed
nature of the northern Indian
Ocean the situation of sri lanka
southern course is extremely
productive for that latitude
I've gone to name the unorthodox
wheels because they actually
break the stereotypes we had for
this species they don't
undertake long-range migrations
they actually have a very
limited range they hang out all
year round in warm tropical
waters of the northern Indian
Ocean there's the smallest of
the blue is that you find in the
oceans they're called pygmy blue
whales they go to 80 feet not a
hundred they have a different
acoustic dialect they also have
different behaviors they lift
their tail flukes up before a
deep dive more often that
anywhere else in the world so
you'll see this about sixty
percent of the time as anywhere
else less than twenty percent of
the time it's a photographer's
dream destination blue as ever
and the world a cost benefit us
because they're very specific
they feed on one single thing
crew these guys feed on
something different but the key
thing here is that they have all
these different behaviors and
adaptations because they're
living in a very confined space
/ very limited range and during
the course of my work I've also
met the oldest blue will in our
population i took this
photograph in 2011 on a
documentary shoot and as soon as
I saw the markings i thought to
myself i have seen you before
luckily not a lot of work had
gone on before on these wheels
in fact there's only one paper
that existed in the history of
our nation and that was done in
1984 and you can see and I've
named it will in time
but the point is this animals at
least 27 years old and it's
living in our waters but what's
really cool about the sighting
is that you can see where i saw
the whaling 2011 was just less
than 10 kilometers away from
where it was cited in 1984 so
we're getting a sense of sight
fidelity how important this area
is to these animals we know that
feeding breathing and carving in
a very confined space so the
conservation problems they face
are far more compounded right
now my crusade is about saving
these wheels from getting killed
by ships the southern coast of
sri lanka is one of the busiest
shipping lanes in the world it's
the main artery through the
Indian Ocean everything from
Singapore to Dubai cruise right
through these waters
here's some of the data we have
the red lines showing you the
stance ship traffic the black
dots
those are whale sightings look
at the south coast there is a
distinct overlap so sightings
like this i totally unsurprising
this is a whale that came
wrapped on the ballot
containership into the main port
in sri lanka in colombo in 2012
12 days later we had another
carcass floating at sea with a
massive propeller gash the thing
is evidence like this can be a
little bit red because
oftentimes the carcasses will
sink get pushed off shore or the
deteriorate so much that when
they come onto Shore we can
actually identify the cause of
death but calculations show that
for everyone we document at
least ten have gone undocumented
so it's not an isolated incident
neither the numbers fall ninety
percent of the vessels that
cruise through our waters are
actually bypassing my country
they're not coming into port so
if we can shift the shipping
lanes 15 nautical miles offshore
we can reduce the problems
significantly and then that ten
percent of very vessels that are
actually coming into port
well if they slow down a little
it would make a difference
I've done the science I've
created all the awareness and
now i'm pushing for policy
change both at the level of sri
lankan government but also
inter-governmental because
shipping lanes are slightly
complex problem but my work is
not just about saving wheels
my work is about showing the
talent of the developing world
I believe that we get local
scientist trained so they can
start looking after their own
waters using local solutions
that is what creates
sustainability and i invite all
of you to join me on this
audacious audacious journey to
achieve this for the sake of the
oceans and humanity
thank you you'll come in you'll
see the the whale rotates as it
approaches the bottom it's
rolling on its side and the
camera twists actually so it's
pointed downwards and you see
these little sand lance fish
swarming all over the bottom
that's the pray that the whales
going after